{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf830
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 CourierNewPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
{\info
{\title Handout 2, History 261, Prof}
{\author local user}
{\*\company lasniu}}\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12540\viewh16140\viewkind1\viewscale85
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl240\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
Handout 1, History 261, Prof. Mogren The End of the Civil War and Reconstruction I. Human Costs \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ul Death and Injuries\kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ulnone  Technological advances made during the war took a frightful toll in human life -- 618,000 soldiers had been killed by combat or disease.  The Union death rate was 23%, the Confederate was about 24%.  Many were permanently disabled.  The American lives lost during the Civil War were nearly as many as died in \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ul all\kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ulnone  other American wars combined. The men who died might have married, raised families, and contributed their talents and energies to building the nation.\
The women they left behind increased the proportion of unmarried women in the population.  The war opened new employment opportunities for women. II. The Shattered South \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ul Property Damage: General Sherman\kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ulnone  The war caused enormous property losses, especially in the Confederacy.  The war was the first "total war" fought by America. The war was a test of societies, economies, and political systems. \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ul Economic Ruin\kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ulnone  Southern war-time financial programs led to economic chaos by the end of the war.  The Northern blockade cut the South off from foreign trade, making it impossible to raise money through tariffs. The Confederacy borrowed heavily.  The primary means of financing the war had been through printing currency, leading to inflation. \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ul Railroads and Industry\kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ulnone  The Southern railroads wore out and had been destroyed or captured by Union forces.  Southern industry was hampered by shortages of labor, capital, raw materials, and technical skill.  Outfitting the Confederate army strained the Southern resources to the limit.  Many Southern armies chronically suffered from a lack of basic equipment, such as shoes and clothing. At the end of the war the South was a desolate place. III. The North \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ul Union Finances \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ulnone The war signaled a shift in relationship between the federal government and private enterprise.  The Republicans took a limited government that sought to protect the marketplace from the threat of monopoly, and changed it into an activist state that promoted and subsidized the efforts of the economically industrious.  Congress passed the Homestead Act (1862), the Morrill Land Grant Act (1862), the Pacific Railway Act (1863), the National Banking Act (1863). The North suffered economic inflation that doubled the cost of living, but nothing like the run-away inflation of the South.  The federal government borrowed money.  Many government obligations were met by issuing paper money called "greenbacks" that were not backed by silver or gold. \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ul Organizational Revolution\kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ulnone  An "organizational revolution" occurred in the North.  Businessmen took advantage of the national marketplace created by the war to build large firms.  The war accelerated the creation of industries producing goods for national rather than local markets.  It also hastened existing trends toward the mechanization of production, the growth of large corporations, the creation of a more unified and efficient banking system, and the emergence of a class of business leaders who were able to take advantage of all of these developments. The people who served in the military and at the "home front" became accustomed to working in large, bureaucratic organizations.  The ability of the North to bring together and manage large numbers of people for both military and civilian efforts contributed significantly to the North's victory. \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ul Civil Liberties\kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ulnone  In order to mobilize the North for the war, Lincoln crushed dissent within the Union.  He suspended the writ of habeas corpus, enabling the federal government to detain anyone suspected of disloyalty.  The heavy-handed tactics used to stifle dissent also had a chilling effect on democratic politics.After the war, the Supreme Court, in \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ul Ex parte Milligan\kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ulnone  (1866), struck down the military conviction of a civilian accused of plotting a to free Confederate prisoners of war.  \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ul Milligan\kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ulnone  has become on of the most important landmark cases in the defense of civil liberties. \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ul American Thought and Morality\kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ulnone  The war changed the way people perceived the relationship between the individual and society.  Individualism gave way to exaltation of organization and government.  The war had long-lasting moral consequences.  Inflation and shortages encouraged speculation and fostered selfishness and fraud.  The war generated corruption, gross materialism, and selfishness. \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ul Government Structure\kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\ulnone  Politically, the war decided that the federal government was supreme over the state governments and had broad constitutional authority to regulate matters affecting "the general welfare."  Paradoxically, although the war was fought to preserve the union, people after 1865 tended to view the United States not as a union of states but as a nation. IV. Emancipation Perhaps the most long term social change caused by the war was the emancipation of slaves.  At the beginning of the war, only radical abolitionists favored turning the war into as crusade to free the slaves.  Immediate emancipation was against Lincoln's preference for a gradual, compensated emancipation plan.  The Republican leadership feared alienating loyal border states by making emancipation a war aim. Lincoln believed that an obstacle to emancipation was the strong racial prejudice of most Whites.  By modern standards, Lincoln was a racist.  He was personally more tolerant, however, than most of his contemporaries, and won the support of influential Black leaders.  Lincoln resisted emancipation because he feared that it would divide the nation and impair the war effort, not because he personally disapproved of slavery. As the war dragged on, sentiment developed for striking a blow at the South's economic and social system by freeing the slaves.  The war turned many Northerners into abolitionists, not because of love for Blacks but from hatred of the South and its institutions. Emancipation was also a diplomatic move to win sympathy for the Union cause in Britain and France. By the summer of 1862, Lincoln was convinced that the Union needed to make abolition a war aim.  On January 1, 1863, Lincoln declared all slaves in those areas under Confederate control to be free.  The proclamation was not a statement of moral sympathy, and Lincoln made it clear that the slaves were freed for military reasons. The Emancipation Proclamation was an important turning point in the war.  It formally committed the Union to the abolition of slavery as a war aim so that the war became a virtual revolution. The Proclamation accelerated the breakdown of slavery as a labor system.  It was also a military victory.  A law passed in 1792 barred Blacks from the army.  By 1862, the need for manpower for the Union army was so great that the Proclamation specifically authorized the enlistment of Blacks.  Thousands of Blacks, many former slaves, served in the Union army. The Proclamation also served an emotional need for Blacks -- it stood as a promise of future improvement. Reconstruction 3 general phases: 1. Wartime (Lincoln, etc.) 2. Presidential (Johnson) 3. Congressional, or Radical Reconstruction The war established the United States as one nation from which no state could secede; and it eradicated slavery. The constitution provided no guidelines. The policy problems were compounded by the social atmosphere of the nation.  Between 1865 to 1880 there was no true peace.  Memories of the past and issues of the present perpetuated and enlarged the antagonism that victory and defeat carried. I. Wartime Reconstruction Lincoln considered reconstruction to be his responsibility.  He never drafted a comprehensive Reconstruction plan.  He favored a lenient policy toward Southerners.  He also appears to have favored limited Black suffrage, but did not seem to be advocating social or political equality for Blacks. "War-time reconstruction" (the "10% Plan"). 1) With the exception of high Confederate officials, Lincoln offered a full pardon and reinstatement as U.S. citizens by taking an oath of allegiance and acknowledging the legality of emancipation.  2) When a number equal to 10% of those voting in the 1860 election had taken the oath, they could establish a new state government.  3) The new state governments were required to abolish slavery and promote Black education. One of the most important motives for the plan was politics -- Lincoln hoped to attract White Southerners to the Republican party and assure that party's national supremacy.  Lincoln also wanted to protect his emancipation policy from a potentially revengeful future Congress.  He believed that his plan would shorten the war by making it easy for disillusioned Confederates to switch sides. During the war, Congress was dominated by the Republican Party, several of whom opposed Lincoln's plan.  A small faction, the "Radical Republicans," were anti-slavery and believed that Lincoln's 10% Plan was too lenient and did not guarantee Black suffrage. A larger group of Republicans also opposed Lincoln's plan.  These moderates were unprepared to grant social, civil and political equality to Blacks.  They did not trust the former Confederates.  The feared that the old Southern ruling class would return to political power and cheat the North of the full benefits of its victory. Both Radicals and Moderates feared that the president was exceeding his powers by using executive authority to restore the Union. In July 1864, Congress outlined its plan for Southern reconstruction.  State citizens could draft new state constitutions only after one-half of the adult White males of the state (not merely 10% of those voting in the 1860 election as proposed by Lincoln) swore an oath of allegiance.  The new state constitutions had to renounce session as illegal, abolish slavery, and repudiate all debts incurred by the Confederate government. Reconstruction was at a standstill, with a powerful president faced off against an equally powerful Congress. II. Presidential Reconstruction (President Andrew Johnson) Lincoln's death ended any chance for the South to enjoy a mild peace.  Retribution, not forgiveness, dominated Northern public opinion. Johnson was strongly opposed to the Southern economic and social elite.  He was not opposed to slavery, only that it was the privilege of the wealthy minority.  He remained a confirmed racist with little interest in the welfare of freedmen. He joined the Radical Republican faction in Congress, but he remained a political "outsider." Johnson appeared to follow Lincoln's outline for quick Reconstruction.  He issued an lenient amnesty proclamation. Johnson's plan prohibited high-ranking and wealthy Confederates from the general amnesty.  These excluded former Confederates would be required to seek individual pardons directly from the president. Many states accepted the conditions with qualifications.  All the new state constitutions limited suffrage to Whites only and lacked any provisions for Black education.  Southern voters defiantly elected prominent Confederate military and political leaders as governors and Congressmen.  	Presidential Reconstruction was also undermined by the new state governments which passed "Black codes" designed to circumvent the Thirteenth Amendment and reduce the freedmen to a new form of servitude. III. Congressional Reconstruction The Radical Republicans, were opposed to the president's Reconstruction program.  The Radicals demanded immediate and absolute political and civil equality for Blacks and believed that Southern society needed to be fundamentally re-made in the image of Northern society.  The Radicals advocating not equal rights for freedmen, but extra rights -- the right to vote and special protection of that right.  This idea was contrary to the American beliefs of equality and self-reliance.  Such protection would require the involvement by federal authorities in the local affairs contrary to conventional American political practice. Johnson recoiled from the prospect of social and economic upheaval contemplated by the Radicals.	Two important presidential vetoes outraged congressmen.  The break between Johnson and Congress was irreversible. The Republican majority in Congress feared that Johnson would not enforce civil rights legislation and that courts would declare such laws unconstitutional.  Congress, therefore, passed the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution in June 1866.  This amendment has come to be one of the most popular of all our constitutional amendments.  It is likely that the Amendment was intended to prohibit race laws such as the Black codes, but probably did not intend to prevent Blacks from being excluded from juries or segregated in public places.  Nevertheless, within the context of its time the amendment was a revolutionary measure. The amendment was also represented the trend begun during the war of centralizing the political power in the U.S. at the federal level because it undermined the power of all the states. In the elections of 1866, the Republicans won more than two-thirds majorities in both the House and Senate.  With this new power the Republicans undertook their own Reconstruction program. The majority of Republicans did accept much of the practical provisions of the Radical plan such as the military occupation of the South. The Radical Republicans had wanted to reshape Southern society before readmitting the former Confederate states to the Union.  Their program of "regeneration before reconstruction" envisioned military rule, confiscation and redistribution of land freedmen, and federal aid for schools to educate both Blacks and Whites. Most Republicans found such programs unacceptable -- they were contrary to traditional American ideals of federalism and property rights.  Most believed that the states should be readmitted quickly, under Republicans control, because Southern political support would be necessary for the Republican party to win the 1868 elections. Radical Republicans and many Blacks believed that without economic independence Blacks would enjoy only nominal independence.  But most Republicans believed it was enough to grant Blacks the right to vote -- Americans had a strong belief in self-reliance, and there was little sympathy for government programs favoring one group over another.  Land redistribution also represented an attack on property rights.  By 1867, the issue of land reform was dead.  It likely that this was not a fundamental cause for the failure of Reconstruction.  In the face of White hostility and institutional racism, Blacks would probably have been no more successful protecting their property rights than they were in protecting their political and civil rights. Fears of Democratic resurgence led Republicans to attempt a revision of the federal government.  A series of laws increased congressional power at the expense of the executive branch.  Congress next attempted to remove President Johnson from office when it became clear that he would fight for his executive powers and use those powers to frustrate Congressional Reconstruction.   Johnson was a poor president but he had done nothing to warrant ejection from office.  He was honest and believed, correctly, that he was fighting to preserve constitutional government. Ultimately the impeachment effort fell one vote short of the necessary two-thirds necessary for removal.  The dissenting senators feared that the removal of a president for political reasons, absent any criminal wrongdoing, would threaten the constitutional balance of powers. The congressional Reconstruction policy and the Fourteenth Amendment achieved the purpose of enabling Black Southerners to vote.  The Radicals, however, had not been satisfied and wished to guarantee the right of Blacks to vote in every state.  By March 1870 the Fifteenth Amendment, guaranteeing all adult men the right to vote, became part of the Constitution. IV. Reasons for the Failure of Reconstruction. The reforming impulse that had created the Republican party in the 1850s had been battered by the war.  People were tired of dealing with issues arising from the war. Northern emotional and ideological commitment to Black citizenship was also waning, and Northerners no longer tolerated military action needed to sustain Republican governments and Black voting rights. Many Republicans began to believe that the most successful political alliance in the South was not with the Blacks but with White Southerners who championed a New South based on industry and urbanization. As the horrors of the Civil War faded into the background, new national crises distracted attention from Reconstruction. As industries in the North grew larger, employing thousands of industrial workers, Northern industrialists became sympathetic to the traditional Southern argument that an economic elite should be allowed to control labor.  Perhaps most importantly, the ideals of the war and Reconstruction were defeated by a deep-seated racism that permeated American life.  Racism was why the South was so unrelenting in it opposition to Reconstruction. Racism is why most Northerners had so little interest in Black rights except as a means to preserve the Union or safeguard the Republic.  Racism is why Northerners were, ultimately, willing to write-off Reconstruction and with it the welfare of Blacks.\
}