{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf830
{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 CourierNewPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
{\info
{\title Handout 6, Hist}
{\author local user}
{\*\company lasniu}}\margl1440\margr1440\vieww22640\viewh16140\viewkind1\viewscale180
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\sl240\qj\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs20 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-2
Handout 5, Hist. 261, Prof. Mogren\
Progressive Reform\
\
I. Progressivism\
	Progressivism was not an organized, single political or social organization.  It mixed elements of liberal concern for the poor with conservative efforts to stabilize business and prevent social chaos.  It was a generally middle-class movement supported by the business community, prosperous farmers, and skilled workers.\
\
	Progressivism had six characteristics:\
	1)  Progressives acted out of concern about the effects of industrial life.  They did not seek to harm business but to humanize and regulate it.\
	2)  Progressives were optimistic about human nature, the possibilities of progress, and the capacity of people to identify and solve problems.\
	3)  Progressives were willing to interfere in the lives of other people.  They believed that they knew best, and therefore had the right to invade peoples' privacy to change their behavior.\
	4)  Progressives preferred voluntary change, but were willing to use state and federal governmental authority to make changes.\
	5)  Progressives blended Protestant moralism with modern social science theories.  They believed that if they could improve a person's environment, they could improve the person.\
	6)  Not all Americans were Progressives, but Progressivism affected the lives of all Americans.\
\
II.  Progressive Pragmatism\
	Progressives were moderate modernizers who accepted the American system as fundamentally sound but in need of adjustment. \
\
 	They adopted a gradual approach, influenced by Darwin's theories about a changing species.  Progressives were concerned about possibilities and results, and focused on the possibility for good, not the absoluteness of evil.\
\
	John Dewey pioneered new principles of education.\
\
	Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes rejected the traditional view that law was fixed and universal.  Rather, law ought to be interpreted according to the experience and needs of a changing society.  Juvenile Court Judge Ben Lindsey believed environment, not heredity, produced juvenile delinquents.  He took children from their dysfunctional families and placed them in foster homes where they could learn appropriate social behavior.  This environmental view of the law, called "sociological jurisprudence," can be seen most clearly in Louis Brandeis's brief in the \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-2
\ul Muller\kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-2
\ulnone  case, which indirectly legitimized the approach of relying on social evidence in determining the law.\
\page III.  Progressive Methods\
	Progressives relied upon Christian morals and the practical tools of expertise and planning.  From the physical and social sciences they borrowed methods of gathering and analyzing data.  Like corporate executives, they relied on management, coordinated systems, and specialized bureaucracies to carry out reforms.\
\
	A new breed of investigative reporter, called "Muckrakers,"   detailed the ills of society in mass circulation, middle-class magazines.  Muckrakers aroused a reform spirit in Americans.  Perhaps the most famous Muckraking novel is \kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-2
\ul The Jungle\kerning1\expnd-1\expndtw-2
\ulnone , which eased the passage of the Pure Food and Drug Act and the Meat Inspection Act.\
\
	Progressives relied upon voluntary organizations and collective action, drawing on the organization revolution in America.\
\
	They also relied on the new class of professionals that had been created as a result of industrialization.  These people were skilled at organizing, trained to solve problems, and their professional organizations educated the public and supported legislation.\
\
	When voluntary action failed, Progressives turned to the government, especially the executive branches, to make reforms.\
\
IV.  Women in the Progressive Era\
	Progressivism attracted women who wanted a more rewarding life in public affairs than they had experienced at home.  Women found that protection of their traditional "sphere" of home and family required women to move beyond that sphere.  Women's organizations introduced them to public life and offered them an avenue to participate in reform programs.\
\
	There was a generation of women who came of age in the Progressive era who were living longer and becoming better educated.  Educated single women turned to nurturing professions because custom and prejudice barred them from other choices.\
\
	Some women sought to destroy the social system that relegated them to inferior status.  Gilman condemned "femininity" and "domesticity" as enslaving.  Sanger worked to free women from the bonds of chronic pregnancy and became an advocate for what she called "birth control."\
\
	The greatest success was women's suffrage.  Male Progressives supported suffrage, hoping that it could end the radical feminist attacks.  Reformers also stressed the practical results of suffrage: women were better able to protect morals and the family; women voters would increase the voting power of native-born whites and offset growing machine-controlled immigrant voting blocs; womens' "purer sensibilities" would help cleanse the politics of corruption.  In 1920, the Nineteenth Amendment granting women the right to vote became law.\
\
V. Politics of Reform: Cities\
	Many city governments wre corrupt.  A few independent mayors proved that cities could be run humanely without changing the structure of the political system. \
\
	Other cities experimented with different forms of government, including the city commission and city manager models. \
\
	Many cities undertook civic reforms to break the corrupt connection between companies doing business with the city and the bosses who controlled the poor and immigrant voters.  Citywide elections ended the old ward system.  Civil service laws helped to create nonpartisan city bureaucracies.\
\
	These reforms resulted in stronger middle-class rule and diminished power of immigrant and poor voters.\
\
VI. Politics of Reform: States\
	Cities had little independent power because city charters granted by state governments limited municipal power.  State rural interests often dominated state legislatures and rarely gave cities power to make changes.  Many state governments were as corrupt as the cities.  Reformers, therefore, tried to control governors to offsetting the troublesome legislatures.\
\
	Governor Robert "Fighting Bob" LaFollette turned Wisconson into one of the most progressive states.   His "Wisconson idea" produced railroad regulation laws, controlled corruption, and expanded civil services.  Direct political primaries weakened the power of political bosses.  Wisconson was the first state to have a state income tax.  University-trained experts increased the state government efficiency.\
\
	Progressives worked for three state reforms: initiative (voter introduction of legislation); referendum (voter enactment or repeal of laws); and recall (voter-initiated removal of elected officials).  In 1912, the Seventeenth Amendment provided for direct election fo senators (who had previously been selected by state legislatures).\
\
	States also established regulatory commissions to fight business abuses.  Reformers also supported state workers compensation and survivor pension laws for widows and children.\
\
VII.  TR and Taft\
	Forty-two year old Theodore Roosevelt, became chief executive when McKinley was assassinated.\
\
	TR came from a patrician family of New York.  The "strenous life" dominated his physical habits, and moralism guided his conscience.\
\
	In choosing a political career, TR defied the conventions of his class.  He was personally flamboyant.  He believed in mild reform.\
\
	TR had a passion for order, a committment to the public, and a keen political sense.  Most presidents had believed that our Constitution set specific limits on the power of the presidency.  TR, however, believed that the president could do anything not expressly forbidden by the Consitiution.\
\
	TR hated racial injustice, and invited Black educator Booker T. Washington to the White House.  TR denounced lynching and appointed Blacks to important federal offices in the South.\
\
	TR feared extremes and worked prevent radiacalism.  He accepted growth -- in business, labor, and capital -- as natural.  In his "square deal" vision, big labor would control big business, big farm organizations would offset the power of big food producers, and so on in a counter-balanced society of competing interests.  Standing astride all, mediating whenever necessary, was big government with enough power to ensure fair results for all.\
\
	TR was not intimidated by big labor or business.  He willingly intervened to settle a coal strike.  He also reaffirmed that business needed to be regulated to make it fair and efficient.  TR used conduct, not size, as the measure of "good" and "bad" trusts.  TR strengthened the power of the federal government to investigate business practices.  Despite his reputation as a "trust buster," TR preferred regulation to litigation.\
\
	TR was our first environmental president, galvinizing growing public concern over the reckless misuse of natural resources and initiating a program of federal management to conserve the natural domain.\
\
	TR's, William Howard Taft easly won the 1908 election.  Republicans retained control of Congress and Taft was anxious to continue TR's reforms.\
\
	Taft was a great administrator, but he disliked politics, preferring conciliation to confrontation.  His willingness to compromise cost him congressional support.  Taft supported the Sixteenth Amendment legalizing a graduated income tax -- an amendment that gave the federal government the fredom and financial independence to undertake new social programs.\
\
	In 1910, TR outlined his "New Natioanlism," a program that stressed planning and efficency in the hands of a powerful national executive.  New Nationalism valued consolidation -- big labor, business and government -- but also insisted on protecting the interests of the individual.  The community had the right to regulate property for the benefit of the public welfare.\
\
	TR announced that he would run for president in 1912 as a Republican.  Despite TR's popularity, Taft won the Republican nomination.  Roosevelt bolted the party and formed an independent third party, the Progressive Party.  The Democrats nominated the reform governor of New Jersy, Woodrow Wilson.\
\
VIII.  Wilson\
	Wilson viewed TR, not Taft, as his opponant.  He attacked TR's "New Nationalsim" with his program called "New Freedom," designed to free Americans from the domination by the rich and powerful.  Wilson rejected the managed economy of the New Nationalism and supported "regulated competition."  Only by limiting the size of business and removing artificial trade barriers could trusts be brought under control and free enterprise preserved.\
\
	Wilson swung between Christian love and Calvinist severity, could be warm and and generous one minute and cold and pettty the next.  He believed that as president he needed to unite and direct his party, as well as shape legislation and public opinion.\
\
	Wilson was a model of executive leadership.  He wanted to work with Congress toward his reform goals.  He kept party discipline tight and threatened to veto bills that he opposed.  He mobilized public opinion to pressure Congress.\
\
	Wilson's first order of business in his New Freedom program was to lower tariffs.  As a result of Willson's pressure, Congress passed the Underwood-Simmons Tariff, the first downward revision of the tariff in 19 years.  To compensate for lost revenue, Congres enacted a graduated income tax.\
\
	Wilson's next reform attack was on money and banking.  Without a stable and flexible currency, Wilson's free market would be enslaved to the great investment banks.  The Federal Reserve Act of 1913 created 12 regional banks scattered accross the nation which held reserves for commercial banks.  A central Federal Reserve Board in Washington, appointed by the president, supervised the system.  It could regulate credit and the money supply by setting the interest rate it charged member banks, by buying of selling government bonds, and by issuing paper currency called Federal Reserve notes.\
\
	The third part of Wilson's program was his attack on the big trusts that dominated American business.  The Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914 created a bipartisan executive agency to oversee business activity.  Its goal was to ensure orderly competition.  The Federal Trade Commission was designed to act more like a guide than a sheriff -- it gave advance warning of government displeasure, offering businesses the chance to remedy the problem.  \
\
	In the last part of the New Freedom program, Wilson got Congress to pass the Clayton Antitrust Act barring some of the worst corporate abuses, such as price discrimination, holding companies, and interlocking directorships.\
\
	Despite Wilson's accomplishments, voters were lukewarm about the New Freedom.  Looking forward to the 1916 election, Wilson began to embrace many of the social reforms of TR's New Nationalism.  He nominated Louis Brandeis to the Supreme Court, where he fought for the social reforms that Wilson's New Freedom lacked.  Wilson supported the 8 hour day for railroad workers, legislation to protect merchant seamen, a federal child labor law, a federal highway act designed to help farmers transport their goods, and a low interest farm loan program.\
}